So, again, welcome and thank you. Again, as we begin any activity, especially our study
contemplation and practice, really connecting with these three essential motivations that
are really the seed and heart of all of our realization of the nine jnanas is so fundamental
and important and really sits us right in the right spot. So, again, just reflecting
with a joy and appreciation on our really super-duper, extraordinary, precious human
birth with all of its freedoms and advantages and beautiful circumstances, and also connecting
with that beautiful motivation that with this precious human birth we'll truly find the
deep nectar of meaning and direct perception of the Buddha's beautiful teachings and come
to realization of that so we can truly be only a benefit for beings and really make
big change for our own course as well as for infinite beings. And with that seeding and
becoming more and more familiar with the innate purity of all appearances, which are just
a beautiful display of our primordial Buddha mind, and with great trust in that and all
the perfections will kind of continue our practice. And so today I was thinking we've
been kind of slowly going through these four thoughts that turn the mind towards the dharma.
And in particular today looking at this fourth thought, you know, reflecting on the defects
of samsara as it's called. As we begin our nundra practice, we're chanting these four
thoughts that turn our mind towards the dharma, towards what's reliable, towards what's meaningful.
But we're not only chanting that as we do any of our practice as much as we can reflect
deeply with our hearts on what the meaning is, which also means a little bit outside
of our formal practice. We really take time to contemplate these things. So these four
thoughts that turn the mind toward the dharma aren't just limited to, you know, kind of
the liturgy of the words we're saying in our nundra text and even, you know, that meaning.
But because our nundra practice is the fundamental foundation of all the practice we're ever
going to do, we know it's critical to kind of be familiar with these four thoughts. In
fact, our lineage teachers ceaselessly remind us that not just with like our, in our formal
nundra text, we have these four thoughts embedded there. But before any practice, reflecting
on these four thoughts is really said to really ensure that our practice will really move
forward and be of benefit. Again, and so what are again, I'm just going to quickly review,
what are these four thoughts that turn the mind toward the dharma or the four renunciation
thoughts they're also called. So reflecting on our precious human birth, reflecting on
impermanence, reflecting on the natural law of cause and effect or karma of actions and
their inevitable results. And then reflecting on samsara, the suffering of samsara, the
all-pervading nature of samsara is suffering. And so why, why do we do this? Because it's
just reminding of us about the truths we live with, like all of the dharma. These are kind
of more ordinary truths, but often we're kind of naively forget them or get caught up in
our habitual patterns and assumptions of how things are and who we are and what will bring
us happiness and etc, etc. So by reflecting on these four thoughts, really, like Rinpoche
says, it helps to soften our hard heads and open, bring some warmth and moisture to our
heart, really see our situation as it is, which naturally is going to turn our mind
towards what's reliable, what's more deeper, all-pervading, reliable kind of truth of ourselves
and of everything. So this fourth thought is reflecting on the kind of the unsatisfier
factory nature of samsara. And like we know, the very first teaching that Buddha Shakyamuni
gave in this world was the four noble truths. The very first one of those four noble truths
is the truth of suffering. And then of course, so just by doing this, the Buddha is really
acknowledging how important it is to acknowledge suffering, or like as Rinpoche often says,
the challenges we have, that there's always something off within our mind, right?
Buddha just stressed again and again how important it is to acknowledge and recognize suffering,
our own suffering and the suffering of others. So the three realms of cyclic existence have
the nature of an ocean of suffering. So what are the three realms and what is cyclic existence
- what are the three realms of cyclic existence? And I think a lot of us know this, but again
we're reflecting on these things and these words we're saying, the three realms of cyclic
existence are what's known as the desire realm, form realm and formless realm. And so that's
another way of framing what the Buddha called samsara, the six realms of samsara or cyclic
existence. So that's the hell realms, the hungry ghost realms, the animal realms, human
realms, the asuras and the gods. So these six realms, that's all of samsara, just as real
for every being within it. And like the Buddha said, as vast as far as their space, their
sentient beings, as much as their sentient beings, their suffering, right? Each being
has by its very nature, the Buddha nature, and yet due to this miracle of not knowing,
we experience samsara and ever flowing within that. So these six realms of samsara are within
these three realms. Now the desire realm spans all up from all the hell realms, all the hunger
ghost realms, all the animal realms, all the human realms, all the asuras and then the
lower realms of the gods is all what's within this desire realm. So then the God realms
is the only kind of realm of class of samsara beings that exists in all three realms. So
above the gods that are in the desire realm are the gods of the formless realm. And then
kind of above that are the, I mean, are the form gods form realm. Above that is the formless
realm. And again, you can look at more charts and details about what these are like. And
but that's essentially important. I just thought to say that because I know a few people have
so as far as these realms go, vast, infinite, none are free from suffering due to ignorance,
attachment, aversion, hope and fear and the actions kind of based on that, you know, delusion,
and all of samsara comes out. And then there's this word, the cyclic existence or samsara
is a Sanskrit word. And then in Tibetan is korwa. And the word meaning of samsara means
something like unceasing flow or unceasing flowing unceasing wand ceaseless wandering,
continuous wandering, that's kind of the word meaning of samsara. And then our great teachers
with Tibetan is the word korwa or which implies the circle or circling, which is that idea
that from beginningless time, you me, all of us, all the infinite beings of samsara
have been circling in not knowing. And all these very, very real experiences ranging
from ultimate torment to great bliss, and the great loss of losing it all. And like
Buddha said, you know, this word of cyclic, like in some of the Vinaya, you know, there's
these quotes, even Kenshin Pauld and Rinpoche gives in these four foundational thoughts
in our treasury of prayers, these quotes from some of the sutras. But there's the one that's
like driven by ignorance, you know, you know, craving and wishing to be to exist. All the
beings of all the realms are circling, you know, foolishly wishing happiness, but doing
all the things that don't get it. You know, so all of the realms were going round and
round, you know, like a potter's wheel, just ceaselessly spinning. And then also like the
famous quotes of like how all the three realms are just ablaze with the sufferings of old
age, sickness, death, hope and fear. Raging, you know, there's kind of no protection and
beings are just like the bees caught in a side of a jar going up and down and all around.
Here we are. So the three realms of cyclic existence have the nature of an ocean of suffering.
So looking at this suffering truth is really looking at, of course, it's important we think
about the causes, but looking at the results. And we're reminded again and again by our
teachers, you know, that each one of us, again, from beginningless time has been wandering
in samsara, creating all kinds of doing all kinds of actions, creating all kinds of karma.
You know, if if we were to, you know, pile up, make little beads of every life we've
lived, it wouldn't fill the world or the universe, you know, all the even though we may not
remember
it, all of the experiences we've had as hell beings, as hungry ghosts, as animals, as humans,
as a suras, as gods that said in the teachings, we've really done it all again and again and
again. We've had countless relations with each other of enmity, of great love and care,
of total betrayal, every imaginable thing it seems we've had. And yet we continue circling.
So how fortunate it is that we actually have the light of Dharma and the deeper teachings
of again, not only the fruit of that of suffering, but the deeper truth of the natural nature
in which all of this is experienced, our very own mind, and that heart, and that path to
realize that and bring out our Buddha nature to fruition, again, to benefit beings. But
looking at these sufferings of samsara is, you know, very good and important kind of
helps again, really soften our heart, wake us up to like, what's going on, even if we
as human beings in this world, right? Here in Padmasamulang, it's so beautiful, so peaceful.
Of course, I've got my own, you know, challenges. I'm sure we all do. There's always things
to do, et cetera, et cetera. But relatively speaking, even just within this limited knowledge
of the world, just think of all these awful wars and atrocities happening this very moment.
Our brothers and sisters just going through so much. So looking at all these six realms
and not just having it be like an intellectual exercise, but really reading about these,
you know, like I brought up words of my perfect teacher, which is such an easy book to have.
If anyone doesn't have it, it really, this is a treasure to have, you know, these beautiful
teachings from Patra Rinpoche. And of course, there's so many other nundra. These are nundra
teachings. But in this Patra Rinpoche goes through, you know, all these defects of samsara.
What are the six realms? You know, what did the hell realms contain, right? It goes, you
know, much, much further than just being a general place. But you know, what are the
hell realms? What's going on in them? Like we're told, there's these 18 hells. Eight
are pervaded by the suffering of heat and pain. Eight by just cold and freezing. Then
there's what's known as the neighboring hells, places like ceaseless kind of swamps of putrid
corpses, etc. And then kind of what are they called? neighboring, neighboring or what's
the word curse? It will come to me. But I thought, yeah, there's just not really time
here for the amount of time we have. But maybe we can just say their names, the 18 hells.
There's eight hot hells, you know, pervaded by again, like I said, the torture of heat
and pain. You know, again, due to the ripening of all of our negative actions, but in particular
our hostile, angry hatred actions, you know, so the highest of the of the hell realms is
called the reviving hell, where just everyone's fighting ceaselessly and hacking each other
to bits until they're all dead. And then instantly a big voice comes and everyone is resurrected.
It said that I think the amount of time there is about five. Let's see, let's see, what
does it say? One human year, 50 human years is one day and the lowest of the God realms.
The beings in this realm live for about 500 years. And then each realm going down deeper
into the hells, it compounds by like factors of two. The black line hell, where again the
main pain is being traced out black lines and then cut up along the lines, rounding
up and crushing hell, the howling hell, the great howling hell, the heating hell. You
know, they're everyone I think is in huge cauldrons of molten metal. And every now and
then we bob up and these, you know, agents hook us and hammer our heads and till we pass
out and that's happiness in that hell. But then of course, and all of these were ceaselessly
reviving again and living for hundreds, thousands of years, which are much longer than our sense
of years. The intense heating hell and then the hell of ultimate torment. And then it
said around all these hells, there's these neighboring hells of like one just full of
hot embers, another full of razors, another full of swords, and another full of like these
trees which these fierce dogs chase you up, but their thorns are going, you know, coming
down. So it's pain in all directions. Anyway, the eight cold hells are ceaselessly colder.
Our bodies are freezing and cracking and blistering, you know, like lotuses. And then these ephemer
al
hells. That's the word I think I was trying to get to. They're here and there and everywhere,
like being born inside a stone or identifying our cell, our bodies as rope, etc. There's
lots of details here. And the point is really reading these details. The predators, the
hungry ghosts, again, the main suffering here is just never getting what you want. Our bodies
are huge and maybe our mouth the size of a pin, our stomach as huge as the ocean, starving.
And then when we finally get what we want, it makes us sick. Or we're just never always
seeing, you know, mirages chasing after them, never being fulfilled, you know, is the main
suffering of the hungry ghosts or the yadaks, the animal realm, the suffering of the animal
realms, there's animals, again, beyond our perception, but ceaselessly just being blown
here and there, either being swallowed by others or boring themselves into the bodies
of others, you know, those of more intelligence are always on the lookout, always afraid of
being, you know, devoured or being, you know, taken advantage of. The human realms, which
we all know, right, there's all these basic sufferings in the human realm. There's birth,
the suffering we go through in birth, kind of old age, sickness, death. There's what's
called the suffering of the aggregate or conditioned things. And what does that one mean? It means,
even like our good vegetarian food, countless beings have died, just in the process of planting
and harvesting that food. That's an example that just because of our karma, our habitual
pattern, the circumstances of our samsara is such that there's always going to be trouble
that's somehow caught up in even our happiness and even in our most pure aspiration, you
know, the best we can do, still somebody somewhere is going to suffer. But again, the important
thing to remember is this isn't the ultimate truth. This is all within this illusion, this
duality display of mind is samsara. So we need to, again, according to right that we know
with karma, we need to be very timid and careful and mindful. And that's why it's so important
to look at all these realms. So the human realm, we've had this suffering of everything
composite, which is what I was just going over, which means again, everything's connected,
somehow, somebody's going to hurt, get hurt somewhere with anything we do, just walking
on the earth, we're crushing beings, you know, etc, etc. There's the suffering of change.
Just we all suffer, even though we know in permanence, we still suffer when things change.
It's uncomfortable. We're losing something. Then there's what's called the suffering upon
suffering, where we might have one thing that's challenging happening. And then on top of
that, another thing is happening, you know, we get sick, and then also, you know, we have
to go, you know, our house burns down, you know, or there's all kinds of permutations
of suffering upon suffering, I kind of think it kind of speaks for itself. But it's not
when it's not just one problem, but one problem on top of another on top of another on top
of another are a lot of these, you know, human sufferings. And then there's these four other
basic sufferings. And what are they? They're the kind of the challenge and the kind of
uncomfortable fear of meeting people who antagonize us. You know, our enemies are, you know, kind
of challenging ones. And the fear of losing those we love, and that support us. And then
the suffering one, you know, of encountering things that we just don't want at all, beyond
like challenging people, circumstances and things that we just don't want that suffering,
and then not getting what we do want. And another big suffering that Ken Rinpoche has
always mentioned so much, with especially of humans, doubt and hesitation. The Asuras,
you know, and again, are always just wracked with jealousy and quarreling and fighting
with the gods. The gods main suffering. Again, now I'm rushing because I think I'm going
a little too long. But as we all know, is falling down, they might have beautiful, graceful
lives in any one of these realms of, you know, desire, fulfillment of desire, you know, or
forms kind of geometric bliss, or the formless realm of just one pointed samadhi. But at
some point, that karma is exhausted. And then due to the big mind and cognition of the gods,
they see they've exhausted and that's the big suffering of the gods as we know, is then
losing all the merit, exhausting all the positive karma they've collected. And then all the
shadows of their previous karma from countless lifetimes kind of bringing them inevitably
blowing towards whatever their next life will be. So then, again, an important thing we're
reminding you to do as we're looking at suffering is read these books. I'm sorry, I don't have
the, you know, not sorry, I don't have the time, but we're so wonderful that we have
all these books, you know, but again, the point is really read and, and it's said in
the instructions. Don't just think about this abstractly. Just like we're reading about,
you know, the people in Gaza, or Ukraine, or in Sudan, or wherever, or whatever's happening
environmentally to the animals, you know, you know, we might read about that, put yourself,
we need to put ourselves just like we are those people. And what is that like? And then
do the same for like each one of these realms. If we ourselves were born, you know, like
in like the reviving hell, where it said, you know, like our skin is as sensitive as
our eyeballs, you know, and all of these just horrible, terrifying circumstances are happening.
And just, you know, immense pain that's just as real as this is real for us, putting ourselves
in that place. And how long are we living through that hundreds of what for our conception
from human conception, hundreds and hundreds and hundreds of years might be just one day
in one of the hells, for example. So what is the place? What are our bodies like? What
are the sufferings we're experiencing really imagining? What is that like? For how long?
What's the cause of this? And then again, with our in so and again, we're kind of getting
that real taste of dissatisfaction scene. That's why it's called the defects we've chosen
due to our, you know, that kind of naivete, we've chosen samsara. And so we're realizing,
oh, you know, from beginningless time, we've been wandering through all these experiences.
So really connecting with that, just like, no, yep, dissatisfaction, you know, disillusioned
with what samsara has to offer. Even in again, that's not to say of course there's good things
in samsara, because we all have that beautiful nature of love, compassion, wisdom, freedom,
you know, those qualities, of course, they reflect in samsara, we're very fortunate that
there's more apparent for us. And still this lamp of our empty nature of wisdom, compassion,
love, as we kind of lean into these experiences and let that illuminate with our bodhicitta.
And then not only have the disillusion with samsara as an experience that we're going
to have unless we really apply these beautiful teachings. But also the think of then all
these beings, think of not just yourself as each of these beings in each one of these
realms, but think of, you know, like classically, our own mother. We're witnessing these things
happening to our own mother, someone who's given us such immense generosity and kindness,
no matter what they're called, going through these. And then, you know, with that sincere
bodhicitta wishing, taking that kind of conviction and responsibility to truly be of benefit
and free them from suffering. And again, not just the temporary fruit of suffering, but
the causes of that suffering. And again, connecting with our four boundless, our precious human
birth, knowing and permanence, the inevitability of karma, reflecting on samsara, you know,
then naturally our mind is turning towards the dharma. So with that big bodhicitta and
really looking as much as we can to these words from the omniscient Buddha of what beings
go through, and for how long and where and that we've experienced all these things, and
we can continue to experience these things or not, you know, refrain from harm, engage
in benefit, tame our own mind. So and then for the benefit of everyone, so I'll, I'll
just stop here, maybe we can say more in the future. My apologies if I've forgotten some
important big part, but just these are a few morsels we can really I think if we really
each one of us take the heart and of course, each one of you have your own relation to
these teachings and their own beautiful, deep, profound meaning. That's really the point
of reflecting, you know, as a group, I'm sorry, it's just one way with our webcast. But again,
just doing, trying to do my best to like kind of inspire myself and all of us to connect
with the teachings and just this beautiful, amazing gift that we have out of out of our
good fortune in our good karma. And so I really pray we all continue to develop that and nurture
that and bring that to real direct fruition and benefit everyone. So we'll just continue
with our nundra practice, taking all of this to heart.